# **Journey of Multiple Zeta Values: Part 1**

<br>

## **Introduction**

I've been yearning to read the book <u>[_Multiple zeta values: from numbers to motives_](http://javier.fresan.perso.math.cnrs.fr/mzv.pdf)</u> by Jos'e Ignacio Burgos Gil and Javier Fres'an. Since university is over I got some time to read through the pdf and I was not disappointed. This book is definitely not a joke and the difficulty gets harder and harder as you go along with it.

I'm just going to state cool facts I learned throughout the first chapter. Let's start with the definition of multiple zeta values first,

<br>

### _Definition 1.1._

The multiple zeta values are the real numbers defined as follows:

$$
\zeta(s_1,...,s_\ell) = \sum_{n_1>n_2>...>n_\ell \ge 1} \frac{1}{n_1^{s_1}n_2^{s_2} \cdots n_\ell^{s_\ell}}
$$

These numbers are associated with tuples of integers $\ddot{s}=(s_1,\cdots,s_\ell)$ satisfying $s_i \ge 1$ and $s_1 \ge 2$ (we call this property admissible).
The story of the Riemann zeta function began before Riemann's article with Euler being the first to solve the _Basel problem_ i.e,

$$
\zeta(2) = \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} \frac{1}{n^2}
$$

In fact the following theorem about the Riemann zeta function at even positive integers is very common:

<br>

### _Theorem 1.1 (Euler, 1735)._

$$
\zeta(2k) = (-1)^{k-1} \frac{(2 \pi)^{2k}}{2(2k)!}B_{2k} \text{ where } k \in \mathbb{Z^+},k \ge 1
$$

Here $B_n$ are the <u>[_Bernoulli numbers_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bernoulli_number)</u>.

And so from this we can see that,

$$
\mathbb{Q}[\zeta(2),\zeta(4),\cdots]=\mathbb{Q}[\pi^2]
$$

Unfortunately we don't know much about the odd values of the zeta function as we do with even ones despite the many efforts of the mathematical community which lead to the following conjecture:

<br>

### _Conjecture 1.1 (Transcendence conjecture)._

<br>

For each integer $k \ge 0$ and each non-zero polynomial $P \in \mathbb{Q}[x_0,\cdots,x_k]$, one has $P(\pi,\zeta(3),\cdots,\zeta(2k+1)) \neq 0$

<br>

This conjecture is completely out of reach of the current techniques in transcendental number theory.

Now let's prove the convergence of the multiple zeta values.

<br>

### _Lemma 1.1._

<br>

let $\ddot{s}=(s_1,s_2,\cdots,s_\ell) \in Z^m$ be a non-empty admissible multi-index. Then the following converges:

$$
\zeta(\ddot{s})=\zeta(s_1,s_2,\cdots,s_\ell)=\sum_{n_1>n_2>...>n_\ell \ge 1} \frac{1}{n_1^{s_1}n_2^{s_2} \cdots n_\ell^{s_\ell}}
$$

### _Proof._

Left as an exercise to the reader. $\square$

<br>

## **The algebra of multiple zeta values:**

<br>

Before starting we need the following definition.

<br>

### _Definition 1.2._

$$
wt(\zeta(\ddot{s}))=wt(\ddot{s})=s_1+\cdots+s_\ell
$$

$$
l(\zeta(\ddot{s}))=l(\ddot{s})=l
$$

<br>

In particular we have $wt(1)=l(1)=0$ for the empty multi-index

<br>

### _Definition 1.3._

<br>

We will write $\mathcal{Z}$ for the $\mathbb{Q}$-subvector space of $\mathbb{R}$ generated by all multiple zeta values:

$$
\mathcal{Z}=\langle 1, \zeta(2), \zeta(3), \zeta(2,1), \zeta(4), \ldots\rangle_{\mathbb{Q}} .
$$

Given integers $k, \ell \geqslant 0$, we also consider the following subvector spaces of $\mathcal{Z}$ :

$$
\mathcal{Z}_k  =\langle\zeta(\ddot{s}) \mid wt(\ddot{s})=k\rangle_{\mathbb{Q}},
$$

$$
F_{\ell} \mathcal{Z}  =\langle\zeta(\ddot{s}) \mid l(\ddot{s}) \leqslant \ell\rangle_{\mathbb{Q}}
$$

$$
F_{\ell} \mathcal{Z}_k =\langle\zeta(\ddot{s}) \mid wt(\ddot{s})=k, \ell(\ddot{s}) \leqslant \ell\rangle_{\mathbb{Q}} .
$$

In particular, the equalities $\mathcal{Z}_0=\mathbb{Q}$ and $\mathcal{Z}_1=\{0\}$ hold.

<br>

The subspaces $F_{\ell} \mathcal{Z}$ define an increasing filtration of $\mathcal{Z}$ :

$$

\mathbb{Q}=F_0 \mathcal{Z} \subseteq F_1 \mathcal{Z} \subseteq F_2 \mathcal{Z} \subseteq \cdots


$$

There is an obvious inclusion

$$

F_{\ell} \mathcal{Z}_k \subseteq F_{\ell} \mathcal{Z} \cap \mathcal{Z}_k


$$

$$
$$
